If you don't know this, you'll be left
behind. In 2026, AI isn't just changing
SEO. It's completely rewriting the
rules. Next year, it's not about
stuffing keywords or chasing back links
anymore. It's about how AI understands
what people actually mean when they
search and which brands it [music] can
trust to give the best answers. I'm Neil
Patel, and in this video, I'm breaking
down the five biggest AI SEO trends
shaping how people search, click,
[music] and buy online. If you don't
adjust to these changes, your rankings,
your traffic, [music] and sales could
drop fast. So, let's jump in. Trend
number one, brand citations over
backlinks. For two decades, SEO has
lived and died by backlinks. The more
links point to your site, the higher you
rank. Simple, right? But here's the
thing. [music] In 2026, backlinks are
losing value. They're being replaced by
something called brand citations. Now,
if you're still chasing backlinks the
old way, you're actually wasting time
and money. Here's why. In the old world,
you would convince bloggers and mediocre
sites to drop your links everywhere. And
that [music] was decently enough to rank
high. But AI has changed a game
completely. When someone asked Perplexi,
"What's the best email marketing
platform?" It doesn't just show you a
ranked list based on who has the most
backlinks. Instead, it mentions brands
in context. A typical answer looks like
this. Mailchimp is known for ease of
use, and it offers more advanced
automations compared to some of the
other alternatives. and then they may
list alternatives. See the difference?
LLMs are now assessing contextual
credibility the same way Google once
revolutionized search with page rank.
But instead of just counting back links,
Chad GPT and Perplexi are evaluating
three critical factors. First, how
relevant is a site mentioning your
brand? Right now, if a random blog
mentions you, it doesn't mean as much,
but it still helps with Chad GBT and a
little bit with perplexity. In the
future though, they're going to start
looking at how relevant is that site
mentioning you and the authority of that
site as well, such as is it Forbes
mentioning you or New York Times.
Second, what's the credibility and age
of your domain name? AI can detect which
sources are authoritative and which
aren't. And third, the one most people
miss, how is your brand framed in the
content? Are you being cited as an
industry leader or just mentioned in
passing? These AI systems are
essentially creating their own brand
authority score in real time. According
to SEM Rush's SEO branding report, brand
reputation, mentions, and sentiment are
overtaking link quality as a dominant
ranking factors in AIdriven search. This
mirrors page ranks early evolution. But
the stakes are higher because AI makes
these authoritative judgments in real
time across every query with zero
transparency. So what do you need to do
right now? First, shift from link
building to citation building. [music]
Get your brand mentioned in
authoritative publications. Pitch
journalists. Contribute expert
commentary [music] and get featured in
industry reports. Of course, if they
want to link to you as well, it won't
hurt. Second, track your AI visibility.
Use tools like Uber suggest that show
you where your brand appears in chat
GBT, Perplexity, or even Google's AI
overviews. Most businesses don't even
realize they are already invisible in AI
search. Third, manage your brand
sentiment everywhere. [music]
AI is crawling your reviews, your social
media, and news coverage to build your
authority score. The brands that focus
[music] on building more citations now
and quality ones will dominate in 2026.
And the ones that are still focused on
building back links, they're going to
watch their traffic and revenue
disappear. Trend two, community
platforms are losing AI ranking power.
Reddit and Kora used to be SEO gold
mines. Not anymore. And what's replacing
them changes everything. Here's a
reality. Leaving helpful comments on
community forums isn't useful anymore
when it comes to AI search results.
Sure, it could help a little bit, but it
doesn't dominate like it used to.
According to [music] Contensify HQ, B2B
SAS trends report, community platforms
like Reddit and Quora are [music]
becoming saturated, and AI tools are
actively shifting towards verified
expert authoritybased content instead.
Why? Because these platforms are really
easy to manipulate with bots and fake
engagement. Now, when Chad GBT answers a
medical question, it's not citing Reddit
thread with 500 up votes. It's
prioritizing an authoritative article
from an actual [music] medical
professional with verified credentials.
AI is asking two critical questions. Who
wrote this? What are their credentials?
And where else are they cited? A comment
from some random user will never compete
with verified industry experts on
authoritative domains. So, here's what
you need to do right now. First, stop
relying on community platforms for SEO.
They're losing AI weight fast. Second,
publish on industry specific
authoritative sites and trade
publications where AI systems actually
look for expertise. Third, establish
your credentials publicly with verified
by lines, author bios, and professional
certifications. AI is actively scanning
for these [music] trust signals. Having
authority over entire topics will help
AI site you, but you also need to
understand that the entire transaction
model is changing. Trend three, LLMs are
becoming transaction endpoints. The goal
of SEO has always been simple. Drive
traffic to your website. The more
clicks, the better. But AI platforms are
making changes that will make website
traffic irrelevant when it comes to
actually converting visitors into
buyers. In September 2025, OpenAI
partnered with Stripe to launch instant
checkout directly inside Chad GPT. Now,
when you ask Chad GBT to find me a
handmade leather wallet, it shows you
options from Etsy and Shopify merchants,
and [music] you can complete the entire
purchase without ever leaving the chat
interface. Think about that for a
second. Search and land's August 2025
report [music] documented a 527%
increase in AI referred sessions. But
here's a critical insight [music] that
most people are missing. That number
represents AI platforms becoming traffic
sources themselves, not referral
engines. Facebook built lead ads to keep
users inside Facebook. Instagram created
an in-app checkout to prevent you from
leaving. Now AI platforms are doing the
same thing, but faster and more
seamlessly. When Chad GBT can process
payments, book appointments, or handle
signups without you ever clicking a
link, why would it send you anywhere
else? But this doesn't mean it's the end
of sales to website traffic. You just
need to adapt. Here's how. First, stop
thinking about AI as a referral source.
It's a sales channel. Your brand needs
to exist inside these platforms, not
just be mentioned by them. Second,
optimize for onplatform conversions. Get
integrated with the commerce systems
these AI platforms are building like
chat GBT Stripe integration. Third,
track your AI native conversions
separately. Most analytics won't show
you when someone converts inside a AI
interface. And speaking of conversions,
there's another massive shift coming.
Trend four, AI ads are about to take
over organic conversions. [music]
Remember when Google search just had 10
blue links? Then Google ads came along
and suddenly you had to scroll past a
handful of ads to see the organic
results. [music] Clickthrough rates
collapsed. Businesses had to pay just to
be seen. Well, the exact same thing is
about to happen inside Chat GBT and
every other AI platform. According to
Search Engine Land, OpenAI is preparing
to launch its own ad platform in 2026.
They're actively hiring ad executives
and building entire monetization teams
dedicated to conversational AI. When ads
dominate AI responses, organic [music]
brand mentions will suffer visibility
loss. The brands dominating AI search in
2025 will have less visibility in 2026
[music] unless they pay to play, just
like what happened with traditional SEO
on Google. Sure, you can still get
organic traffic and it is still
valuable, but a certain portion of the
searchers will click on paid ads. So,
here's what you need to do to profit
from this AI ads way. First, maximize
your organic AI visibility before ads
launch. Build your brand authority and
citation profile where organic
placements still matter. We've covered
this in trends one and two. Second,
[music] allocate 10 to 15% of your
current ad budget to AI platform
testing. When chat GPT ads launch,
you'll want the capital ready to grab
early inventory at lower cost. In the
meantime, Google has already started
rolling out its own AI powered ad
products. So, you can actually launch
ads in Google AI overviews right now.
Third, test early when these platforms
launch. Early adapters always get better
performance and lower cost before the
auction becomes competitive. The
businesses that prepare now will
dominate paid placements. But there's
one more trend that's even more
critical. Before I go into trend five,
if you just want someone to do this all
for you, check us out at NP Digital. We
just took Refi Jet and got him a
three-digit traffic increase from LLMs
and won a OMA award for the results.
Trend five. Voice-based AI search
creates winner take all markets. In
voicebased AI search, ranking number one
is the only position that matters. When
someone asks their car's AI for the best
plumber near me, only one brand gets
recommended. Second place doesn't
[music] exist. The more people use AI,
the more visibility gets concentrated to
a tiny [music] portion of the market.
And we're already there. Apple is
integrating advanced AI search into
Siri. Voice integration is exploding in
[music] homes, cars, wearables, and
devices everywhere. And this creates a
fundamental shift in how markets [music]
work. So what do you need to do right
now? First, optimize for voice queries.
Voice searches are conversational
question based. Your content needs to
directly answer what's the best and who
should I use for type questions in your
niche. Second, dominate your category
positioning. You can't be a good option.
You need to be the definitive answer. AI
only recommends the most authoritative
brand. Third, test your AI [music] voice
visibility now. Ask Chat GPT, Siri, and
voice assistants questions [music] your
customers would ask. If your brand isn't
recommended first, you're losing right
now. Voice-based AI search is creating
monopolies in every category. The brands
that become the default answer in 2026
will start capturing the majority of the
[music] market, especially when the
younger generation grows up as they
primarily use voice search over
textbased search. Bonus trend: Keywords
are dead. topics rule. If you ask a SEO
expert in 2023 how to rank for email
marketing, they tell you to create a
really in-depth guide [music] on email
marketing. But in 2026, that strategy
won't save you because AI doesn't read
content the way the old Google did. More
[music] keywords doesn't equal more
relevance anymore. If anything, it's
likely to get you flagged as lowquality
content. Many studies and even what we
see across our own clients show that SER
success now depends on full topic
coverage and intent alignment. When
someone asks about email deliverability,
Google's AI just doesn't look at the
phrase five times. It scans for
everything connected to it. Sender
reputation, authentication, list
hygiene, engagement metrics, the full
topic. Businesses creating thin content
targeting individual keywords will
become [music] invisible. So here's how
to avoid that. First, audit your content
for topic coverage, not keyword density.
Second, build comprehensive content hubs
that cover subjects completely, not
isolated post targeting single keywords.
Third, structure content for AI
comprehension using clear headers,
structured data, and complete
explanations. Look, these five trends
are just the beginning. The AI
revolution in search is happening right
now, and businesses that adapt will
dominate their markets. The ones that
don't, they'll be left behind wondering
what happened. But here's the thing,
this only works if you know how to audit
your content for AI readiness. In my
next video, I'll break down how we help
clients futureproof their entire content
strategy so they're recognized as a
trusted authority and they outplace
their competition.